---
published: true
title: Data structures
collection: st
layout: single
author_profile: true
read_time: true
categories: [da_tuto]
excerpt : "Data Analysis Basics"
header :
    overlay_image: "https://maelfabien.github.io/assets/images/wolf.jpg"
    teaser: "https://maelfabien.github.io/assets/images/wolf.jpg"
comments : true
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
sidebar:
    nav: sidebar-sample
---

<script type="text/javascript" async
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

Sometimes, we want to manipulate a list of integers, or a list of strings, or even a list of variables. These lists are called data structures, or collections. There are several collection types which can help :

# Data structures

## List

A list contains a list of items of any kind, any size. It is mutable and ordered. Think about it as a way to save the grades of several students at a test for example.

```python 
grades = [13, 15, 11, 9, 20]
```

A list can hold any kind of item, for example:

```python 
a = 3
b = "Hello"
var_a = [a, b]
```

A list can also contain other lists:

```python 
var_a = [[2,0], [1,1]]
```

When you create a collection, you might want to retrieve the value of a certain element, e.g the grade of a certain student. This is called indexing. To index a list, simply put into brackets the index of the item:

```python
grades = [13, 15, 11, 9, 20]
grades[0]
```

```
13
```

In Python, the indexing starts at 0, which means that to retrieve the first value, you actually retrieve the one at position 0. We can then retrieve the second element using index 1.

```python
grades[1]
```

```
15
```

To retrieve values between indexes 1 (included) and 3 (excluded), you can simply type:

```python
grades[1:3]
```

```
[15, 11]
```

The output is a sub-list that contains only the values we are interested in. You can retrieve the elements from the 2nd position (included) until the end using:

```python
grades[1:]
```

```
[15, 11, 9, 20]
```

All you need to do is to not specify an end index. To take the elements from the beginning until the 3rd element (excluded):

```python
grades[:2]
```

```
[13, 15]
```

You can also count backwards to start from the end. Simply use a minus, and start at minus 1 as the last element, and move backwards.

```python
grades[-1]
```

```
20
```

```python
grades[-2]
```

```
9
```

You can also use the indexing until the end this way:

```python
grades[-2:]
```

```
[9, 20]
```

You can replace an element of a list by indexing:

```python
grades[0] = 14
```

```
[13, 15, 11, 9, 20]
```

To add a new element, we say that we append a new element, and use the corresponding keyword:

```python
grades.append(15)
```

If you want to specify the position of the element to insert, you can also use the word `insert` :

```python
grades.insert(2, 11)
```

You don't need to do `list = list.append...`, this operation modifies the original list by itself.

A list has a length, and you can use the keyword `len` in Python to count the number of elements.

```python
len(grades)
```

```
5
```

To get the maximum of a list, simply use the `max` keyword:

```python
max(grades)
```

```
20
```

Same goes for the minimum with `min`. You can also compute the sum with the keyword `sum`. There are few keywords to remember in Python for data analytics, but don't worry, we've already covered a good part of them.

To compute the average of a list, you can divide the sum by the number of components:

```python
sum(grades) / len(grades)
```

```
13.6
```

## Tuple

A tuple is a list that cannot be transformed (immutable).

```python 
var_a = (1,3,4,5)
```

You cannot add element to a tuple or modify it without creating a second one or transforming it into a list.

## Set

A set is an unordered list made of unique elements only. If you add several duplicates, the set will only keep each value once.

```python
var_a = set([1, 2, 3, 4])
```

## Dictionary

A dictionnary has a key and a value for each item. You can use it to store the id of a customer and the value attached to that id for example.

```python 
dict_a = {'id_1':13, 'id_2': 15}
```

A dictionary can also contain new dictionaries as values. For example:

```python 
dict_b = {'id_1':{'address':'London', 'paid':180}, 'id_2':{'address':'Paris', 'paid':220}}
```

You can retrieve the value in `dict_a` for the key `id_1` by simply using square brackets:

```python
dict_a['id_1']
```

```
13
```

You can add a new element to the dictionary by referencing a new key:

```python
dict_a['id_3'] = 12
```

This is it for the data structures, you'll manipulate them a lot in the next sections.

> If you found the article useful or see ways in which it could be improved, please leave a comment :)