---
published: true
title: Making your code production-ready
collection: bgd
layout: single
author_profile: true
read_time: true
categories: [bigdata]
excerpt : "Tips & Tricks"
header :
    overlay_image: "https://maelfabien.github.io/assets/images/wolf.jpg"
    teaser: "https://maelfabien.github.io/assets/images/wolf.jpg"
comments : true
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
sidebar:
    nav: sidebar-sample
---

As I currently am putting some Python code in production, I though that sharing some tricks and pakcages might be a good idea.

# Project Structure

Let's first start with an overview of what your project's structure should look like for the most basic use case of publishing it to GitHub for other developers :

```
- README.md
- LICENSE.txt
- requirements.txt
- app
    - files.py
    - tests.py
```

The file `files.py` is your project. The file `test.py` implements unit tests. The file `requirements.txt` specifies any depenencies needed in your project, with the exact version.

# Automatically collect your requirements

A famous option to save your requirements in a file automatically is to use `pip freeze`. However :
- pip freeze only saves the packages that are installed with pip install in your environment.
- pip freeze saves all packages in the environment including those that you don't use in your current project. (if you don't have virtualenv)
- and sometimes you just need to create requirements.txt for a new project without installing modules.

For this reason, using `pipreqs` is better. The GitHub project can be found [here](https://github.com/bndr/pipreqs). After installing the package, simply run :

```bash
pipreqs /home/project/location
```

And a `requirements.txt` file containing all dependencies and versions will be created. For example :

```
spacy==2.0.18
pandas==0.23.0
numpy==1.15.4
```

# AutoPEP8

PEP8 is a standard for Python programming. It specifies the number of spaces in each case, the number of lines between 2 sections and much more. There are tools to automatically "clean" your code so that they fit with the PEP8 format. [AutoPep8](https://github.com/hhatto/autopep8) is the most famous option to do this. Simply run :

```bash
autopep8 --in-place --aggressive --aggressive <filename>
```

And your code will be modified accoring to PEP8 standards. AutoPep8 will fix indentation issues, lines that are too long, lists that are too long...
