---
published: true
title: Speaker Verification using SVM-based methods
collection: ml
layout: single
author_profile: false
read_time: true
categories: [machinelearning]
excerpt : "Speech Processing"
header :
    overlay_image: "https://maelfabien.github.io/assets/images/lgen_head.png"
    teaser : "https://maelfabien.github.io/assets/images/wolf.jpg"
comments : true
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
sidebar:
    nav: sidebar-sample
---

This article requires having read the first article on Speaker Verification using GMM-UBM method.

# GMM super-vectors

SVM-based method, as GMM-UBM method, rely on GMM vectors, but in another format. We must compute SVM super-vectors, a concatenation of GMM mean vectors in a single vector. We concatenate the feature vectors we extracted for each mixture component. Instead of having 512 Gaussian components of dimention 26 each, we have a single vector of size $ 512 \times 26 = 13312$.

<script type="text/javascript" async
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

# SVM classification

Support Vector Machine (SVM) algorithm learns a discriminative frontier between two classes which maximizes margins. It can leverage a non-linear kernel mapping to project the data in a high-dimensional space in which it is linearly separable.

The two classes to distinguish from are simply:
- the target speaker
- the impostor/background/population

The discriminative function of the SVM is given by:

$$ f(x) = \sum_{i=1}^N \alpha_i y_i K(x, x_i) + d $$

Where:
- $ y_i $ is the ground truth for the output value, either 1 or -1.
- $ x_i $ is the support vector
- $ \alpha_i $ are the corresponding weights
- $ d $ is a bias term

And that's it ! We just need to train the SVM model on GMM super-vectors with positive and negative labels. Applying a SVM with a non-linear Kernel will identify the discriminative frontier.

The prediction is straight-forward, since we just need to extract the super-vector and run it into the trained SVM.
