---
published: true
title: Functions
collection: st
layout: single
author_profile: true
read_time: true
categories: [da_tuto]
excerpt : "Data Analysis Basics"
header :
    overlay_image: "https://maelfabien.github.io/assets/images/wolf.jpg"
    teaser: "https://maelfabien.github.io/assets/images/wolf.jpg"
comments : true
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
sidebar:
    nav: sidebar-sample
---

<script type="text/javascript" async
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

Writing code in Python is quite simple, but we need to make it re-useable if we apply the same code over and over again during our project. We do so by wrapping our code into functions.

# Functions

This about this transformation that you want to apply to a string:

```python
start_string = "12-12-XXBC"
```

You want to extract the first two letters of this code, here "XX", and put them in lowercase.

```python
start_string = start_string[6:8]
start_string = start_string.lower()
```

```
xx
```

Now, you need to repeat that 5 times. Writing this code 5 times for 5 different variable names would be cumbersome. You can wrap it in a function using the keyword `def`:

```python
def extract_code(x):
	return x[6:8].lower()
```

This function has a name: `extract_code` that I chose arbitrarly. It takes one input, here `x`. This input name does not point to any variable, it's simply here to say that we'll later apply this function on some input. And for this given `x`, it extracts the right part, puts it into lowercase and returns this value.

You can then call this function and specifiy the input we want:

```python
string_1 = extract_code("12-12-XXBC")
string_1
```

```
xx
```

You can apply whatever transformation you want with a function, on whatever input data type. You can also sum two integers easily:

```python
def add_integers(a, b):
	return a + b
```

The inputs can take a default value, and if its value is not specified by the user when we calls the function, it will use this default value in the function:

```python
def add_integers(a, b=1):
	return a + b
```

```python
add_integers(2)
```

```
3
```

"a" takes the value 2, which is specified by the user, while "b" is not specified and therefore takes the value 1 by default.

> If you found the article useful or see ways in which it could be improved, please leave a comment :)