---
published: true
title: My Ph.D. process
collection: phd
layout: single
author_profile: true
read_time: true
categories: [phd]
excerpt : "Other"
classes: wide
header :
    overlay_image: "https://maelfabien.github.io/assets/images/wolf.jpg"
    teaser : "https://maelfabien.github.io/assets/images/wolf.jpg"
comments : true
sidebar:
    nav: sidebar-sample
---

<style>
* {
  box-sizing: border-box;
}

body {
  background-color: white;
  font-family: Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

/* The actual timeline (the vertical ruler) */
.timeline {
  position: relative;
  max-width: 1200px;
  margin: 0 auto;
}

/* The actual timeline (the vertical ruler) */
.timeline::after {
  content: '';
  position: absolute;
  width: 6px;
  background-color: #474e5d;
  top: 0;
  bottom: 0;
  left: 50%;
  margin-left: -3px;
}

/* Container around content */
.container {
  padding: 10px 40px;
  position: relative;
  background-color: inherit;
  width: 50%;
}

/* The circles on the timeline */
.container::after {
  content: '';
  position: absolute;
  width: 25px;
  height: 25px;
  right: -17px;
  background-color: #474e5d;
  border: 4px solid #FF9F55;
  top: 15px;
  border-radius: 50%;
  z-index: 1;
}

/* Place the container to the left */
.left {
  left: 0;
}

/* Place the container to the right */
.right {
  left: 50%;
}

/* Add arrows to the left container (pointing right) */
.left::before {
  content: " ";
  height: 0;
  position: absolute;
  top: 22px;
  width: 0;
  z-index: 1;
  right: 30px;
  border: medium solid #474e5d;
  border-width: 10px 0 10px 10px;
  border-color: transparent transparent transparent #474e5d;
}

/* Add arrows to the right container (pointing left) */
.right::before {
  content: " ";
  height: 0;
  position: absolute;
  top: 22px;
  width: 0;
  z-index: 1;
  left: 30px;
  border: medium solid #474e5d;
  border-width: 10px 10px 10px 0;
  border-color: transparent #474e5d transparent transparent;
}

/* Fix the circle for containers on the right side */
.right::after {
  left: -16px;
}

/* The actual content */
.content {
  padding: 20px 30px;
  background-color: #474e5d;
  color: white;
  position: relative;
  border-radius: 6px;
}

/* Media queries - Responsive timeline on screens less than 600px wide */
@media screen and (max-width: 600px) {
  /* Place the timelime to the left */
  .timeline::after {
  left: 31px;
  }
  
  /* Full-width containers */
  .container {
  width: 100%;
  padding-left: 70px;
  padding-right: 25px;
  }
  
  /* Make sure that all arrows are pointing leftwards */
  .container::before {
  left: 60px;
  border: medium solid white;
  border-width: 10px 10px 10px 0;
  border-color: transparent white transparent transparent;
  }

  /* Make sure all circles are at the same spot */
  .left::after, .right::after {
  left: 15px;
  }
  
  /* Make all right containers behave like the left ones */
  .right {
  left: 0%;
  }
}
</style>

<script type="text/javascript" async
src="https://cdn.mathjax.org/mathjax/latest/MathJax.js?config=TeX-MML-AM_CHTML">
</script>

I am keeping track here of my Ph.D. process. I don't know if it will be of any interest for readers however.


<div class="timeline">
  <div class="container right">
    <div class="content">
      <h2>September 2020</h2>
      <p>Accepted workshop to describe the use of speech processing criminal investigations at TIM 2020 (Traitement de l'Information Multimodale).</p>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="container left">
    <div class="content">
      <h2>August 2020</h2>
      <p>Participated and won the <a href="https://www.createchallenge.org/">International Create Challenge</a> organized at Idiap with an assistive device named SoundMap that uses Head-Related Transfer Function (HRTFs) to provide directional audio feedbacks for blind and visually impaired people.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="container right">
    <div class="content">
      <h2>July 2020</h2>
      <p>Submitted paper rejected from Interspeech 2020. Working on a re-submission for ICASSP. Submitting a second paper to CoNLL 2020 on Authorship Attribution.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="container left">
    <div class="content">
      <h2>June 2020</h2>
      <p>Finished the EPFL class: Statistical Sequence Processing with some work presented on EM for Gaussian Mixture Models and Hidden Markov Models training.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="container right">
    <div class="content">
      <h2>June 2020</h2>
      <p>First paper submitted to Interspeech 2020: <a href="https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.02093"> Improving Speaker Identification using Network Knowledge in Criminal Conversational Data</a>.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="container left">
    <div class="content">
      <h2>April 2020</h2>
      <p>COVID-19 strikes, working from home on data processing and speaker identification.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="container right">
    <div class="content">
      <h2>March 2020</h2>
      <p>Starting my Ph.D. at Idiap Research Institute, as an EPFL Student.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>